Coming up on a new year, i'd like to take a moment to reflect on myself and my place in the world. The curiosities, quirks, dreams, and failures of the past few years. A full deep dive into the iceberg of self.

Taking a moment for brief structural concerns. Several categories will be covered: self, social, projects, 

## Part I: Self

I've struggled over the past few years in taking care of myself. Enough executive function to not live in total squalor, but not enough to be fully on top of things: booking doctors appointments, haircuts, etc. these things tend to fall through the cracks.

Sleep has also been a crucial pain point. The happiest I've been recently was when I'd gotten into the rhythm of waking up at 6am every day for a few weeks. That was quite nice. But once broken, it appears a dream to me once again. It feels crucial that I find balance here.

It feels good to have a place to call home. This is really the first time I've rented a place, and it'd be really nice to run more events with friends here over the next year. We've slowly been making it more homey, and I think it'll keep improving. I do worry that it ties me down too much sometimes to San Francisco, but it's not too bad— that's probably a good thing at the end of the day.

## Part II Social

It feels like I've come to the crux of a crisis of personality. These days, I question who I am in the world, how other people see me. I feel like a dull rock, smoothed over and uninteresting. This is not to say I think of myself badly, or that this affects me significantly in the day to day. More that it is a creeping worry that I lack the personality and energy to socialize really well and that I may be blocking myself from progressing forward to the things I want in life because of it.

The heart of the problem, I've noticed— I do not bring my own energy to conversations. Oftentimes merely mimicking or trying to match the other person's energy. This is not good, and is pretty central to why I've felt lost as to my true personality because it feels like I interact with different people so differently I've lost a little bit of what it means to be myself.

There are also a number of negative conversational and social traits:
- Simply not being interested enough in others
- Mimicking energy / conversational patterns too much
- Not bringing my own unique energy to conversations
- Too associative, talking about myself or things I'm reminded of
- Sometimes condescending, hurting the people around me

The last point is something Matt has brought up with me a couple times, and a reason why he has not been showing me as many of his projects lately. Moments where I thought I was speaking jokingly, I was actually hurting him with my words— but I didn't think much of it. It's 

This coming year I'd like to be more conscious of how I socialize, and deepen friendships with those around me. I'd like to learn to be more interested in others, and to develop my own energy so-to-speak.

It may be beneficial to find a therapist (or psychoanalyst, or conversationalist idk) with which to speak about some of these issues and have them help to pressure me to improve. Would be beneficial at the very least to have a time each week to reflect on relationships and people around me.


## Part III: Projects



## Part IV: Future

